[♪♪♪♪♪]
[PHONE RINGS]
-EMERGENCY. KERRY SPEAKING.
HE'S HERE?
[AMBULANCE SIREN WAILS]
-OKAY, GUYS.
THEY'RE HERE.
-WORKING
IN THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT,
EVERY DAY
IT'S A LITTLE DIFFERENT.
[BUSTLE OF WORKERS
IN CONVERSATION]
-BASICALLY, A STAB WOUND
TO THE RIGHT CHEST.
NO OTHER INJURIES
APART FROM
THE SUPERFICIAL INJURIES
TO THE CHEST.
THAT'S ABOUT A 10-INCH BLADE,
SERRATED,
AND IT'S BURIED
AT LEAST TWO INCHES.
-OH, MY GOD.
[LOUD CHATTER]
-OKAY, GUYS.
LET'S KEEP IT DOWN.
-GUYS, WE NEED TO KEEP
THE NOISE DOWN, PLEASE, HUH?
-I THINK ALL OF US,
OUR ADRENALIN GOES A LITTLE BIT.
BUT IT IS ALWAYS SURPRISING
WHEN YOU SEE SOMEONE COME IN
AND THE KNIFE IS STILL IN PLACE.
-CAN YOU TELL ME YOUR NAME?
-ARE YOU OKAY?
DO YOU UNDERSTAND
WHAT'S GOING ON?
ARE YOU IN A LOT OF PAIN?
-IF YOU'RE AIMING A KNIFE
STRAIGHT FOR THE HEART,
YOU'RE ATTEMPTING TO DO
SIGNIFICANT HARM.
-WIGGLE YOUR FINGERS
ON THIS SIDE.
...MY FINGER.
SQUEEZE MY FINGER.
SQUEEZE. SQUEEZE MY FINGER.
-GIVEN WHERE THE KNIFE
WAS STICKING OUT,
HE WAS REMARKABLY STABLE.
NOW, WHETHER THAT'S JUST BECAUSE
THE KNIFE DIDN'T GO IN
FAR ENOUGH,
WE'LL FIND OUT.
-OKAY, WE'LL GET YOU
TO SQUIRT IT OUT.
-SO REMOVING ANY KNIFE
RIGHT NOW
IS THE WRONG DECISION.
HE'S GOING UP
TO THE OPERATING ROOM,
AND THAT'S WHERE IT'S
THE SAFEST PLACE TO TAKE IT OUT.
-THERE'S NO TYPICAL DAY
IN EMERGENCY.
[AMBULANCE SIREN WAILS]
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-THE NEXT OF KIN,
EMERGENCY CONTACT?
-UH, CAN IT BE MATT?
-LET ME GO THROUGH
YOUR BLOODWORK
AND WE'LL TAKE IT FROM THERE,
OKAY?
-AAH!
-THAT'S SORE THERE, HEY?
-YEAH.
-WHAT MAKES OUR JOB
REALLY NEAT
HERE
AT VANCOUVER GENERAL HOSPITAL
IS THE VARIETY.
SO WE SEE YOUNG PEOPLE,
WE SEE ELDERLY PEOPLE.
WE MIGHT GO
FROM SEEING A PATIENT
WHO IS SUFFERING FROM A STROKE
AND THEN MOVE ON AND SEE
SOMEBODY WITH A ROLLED ANKLE.
WE NEVER REALLY KNOW
WHAT'S COMING IN NEXT.
-LOWER IT DOWN A BIT.
NICE AND LOUD.
-THE PEOPLE THAT I WORK WITH
ARE FANTASTIC.
THEY'RE A BIG PART OF THE REASON
WHY I ENJOY WORKING HERE
SO MUCH.
-OPEN YOUR EYES.
LOOK AT ME.
HI.
[SLOWLY] CALM DOWN.
IT TAKES A SPECIAL KIND
OF PERSON
TO WORK FULL-TIME IN EMERG
FOR SURE.
YOU HAVE TO THINK ON YOUR FEET
AND PROBLEM-SOLVE,
AND YOU DON'T MIND IT
WHEN THINGS GET SUPER-WACKY
AND YOU DON'T SIT DOWN
FOR 12 HOURS STRAIGHT.
-OPEN YOUR EYES.
THIS IS YOUR LAST CHANCE
BEFORE WE PUT A BREATHING TUBE.
ONE OF THE LESSONS YOU LEARN
IN THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
IS HOW UNPREDICTABLE LIFE IS.
IT CAN TRULY TURN
AND CHANGE DRAMATICALLY
ON A DIME,
AND IN AN INSTANT.
WE WITNESS PEOPLE
WHOSE LIVES GET TURNED
COMPLETELY UPSIDE DOWN
AT A MOMENT'S NOTICE,
AND WE GET TO BE THERE
FOR THEM.
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-JONATHAN?
-MM-HMM.
DO YOU GO BY JOE
OR BY JONATHAN?
-JONATHAN.
-OKAY.
[CELL PHONE RINGS]
-OH, THAT'S MY MOM.
IT'S JUST...
I'LL PICK IT UP LATER.
-DO YOU MIND JUST...
-YEP.
-IT'S JUST LIDOCAINE.
SO I'M JUST GOING
TO PUT THIS ON HERE
JUST FOR A SECOND.
SO WE HAVE A YOUNG GENTLEMAN
THAT HAS SOMETHING CALLED
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION,
WHERE THE HEART
IS BEATING IRREGULARLY.
-THIS MORNING, I WOKE UP,
AND IT'S AS IF I RAN,
LIKE, A MARATHON OR SOMETHING.
MY HEART WAS JUST GOING OFF.
[FAST BEEPING]
SO USUALLY A HEARTBEAT'S BY...
IT GOES BUMP, BUMP, BUMP, BUMP.
RIGHT NOW, APPARENTLY
IT GOES BOOM-BOOM,
BOOM-BOOM-BOOM, BOOM-BOOM,
BOOM-BOOM-BOOM.
[BEEPING]
-WE TYPICALLY DON'T WANT PEOPLE
TO REMAIN IN THIS IRREGULAR
HEART RHYTHM
FOR A PROLONGED PERIOD OF TIME,
SO WE'RE GOING TO USE
ELECTRICITY
TO CHANGE HIS HEART RHYTHM
FROM THIS IRREGULAR
BACK INTO A NORMAL RHYTHM.
-THOSE ARE THE PADS THAT WILL
GIVE YOU THE LITTLE SHOCK, OKAY?
-OKAY.
THEY KNOCK ME OUT
AND SHOCK MY HEART
BACK TO NORMAL.
-LET'S PUT THIS ON YOUR FINGER.
-OKAY.
-IT'S A PRETTY SCARY CONCEPT,
AND WHAT THE RISK FACTORS ARE,
WHAT COULD GO WRONG?
WE COULD GIVE THEM ENTIRELY
WAY TOO MUCH MEDICATION
AND COMPLETELY PUT YOU TO SLEEP
TO THE POINT OF VIEW
THAT YOU STOP BREATHING.
THEN THERE'S A WHOLE BUNCH
OF RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THAT.
-YOU'VE HAD THIS DONE BEFORE.
-NO.
-OKAY.
SO WE'RE GOING TO GIVE YOU
SOME SEDATION SOON, OKAY?
-HE SEEMS ACTUALLY QUITE BLASE
ABOUT IT,
MORE SO THAN I WOULD BE.
-OKAY, SO WE'RE GOING TO PUT YOU
TO SLEEP, OKAY?
IT MIGHT STING
IN THE ARM A LITTLE BIT.
-MOVE YOUR HEAD DOWN A LITTLE.
-HOW ARE YOU FEELING THERE?
-I'M FEELING WOOZY AND DIZZY.
-[MONITOR BEEPING,
CONVERSATIONS IN BACKGROUND]
-HOW ARE YOU DOING, JONATHAN?
-OKAY, LET'S CHARGE.
-EVERYONE CLEAR.
[MACHINE MAKES
HIGH-PITCHED WHINE]
[STEADY TONE]
[THUMP OF DEFIBRILLATION]
[MONITOR BEEPING]
-DEEP BREATH IN, JONATHAN.
ALL RIGHT, BIG BREATH IN.
BIG BREATH IN.
-DEEP BREATH, JONATHAN.
-BIG BREATH, BIG BREATH.
JONATHAN?
OH, THERE YOU GO.
-SLOWLY COMING TO.
-CAN YOU GIVE US A THUMBS UP?
SWEET.
WE'LL SIT YOU UP.
-THERE WE GO.
-HE GOT MAYBE A LITTLE BIT
TOO MUCH SLEEP MEDICATION.
WE HAD TO YELL AT HIM
A FEW TIMES
TO REMIND HIM TO BREATHE,
WHICH HE DID.
-JONATHAN. ALL DONE.
-YOU'RE ALL DONE?
-ALL DONE, YEAH.
-HOW LONG WAS I OUT?
-EIGHT MINUTES?
-OH, OKAY.
-NOT LONG.
-THE PATIENT CAN GO HOME
HALF AN HOUR, AN HOUR LATER
AFTER THE PROCEDURE.
SO, YOUR HEART, DOES IT FEEL
ANY DIFFERENT NOW?
-ACTUALLY, IT'S MUCH BETTER.
IT DOESN'T FEEL THAT STRESS
THAT, LIKE,
AFTER YOU DID A LONG RUN
OR, LIKE... HEARTBURN STRESS.
-HE'S A LITTLE YOUNG TO HAVE
THIS ATRIAL FIBRILLATION.
HE'S GOT TO FOLLOW UP
WITH A NEUROLOGIST
TO TRY AND FIGURE OUT
WHY EXACTLY HE HAD
THESE SYMPTOMS.
-I'M GLAD I'M BACK TO NORMAL,
I GUESS, RECOVERING.
[AMBULANCE SIREN WAILS]
-OKAY, PATIENT'S HERE.
PULL THE CURTAINS,
THERE, SOMEBODY.
THANK YOU.
-WE'LL GO.
-YEAH.
-SENSE OF HUMOUR IN THE ER,
I THINK, IS ESSENTIAL.
WE MAKE A JOKE
THAT WE'RE ESSENTIALLY
PREVENTING DARWINISM,
BUT THERE'S SOME ELEMENT
OF TRUTH TO THAT.
IT'S HARD TO SAY
THE DUMBEST THING I'VE SEEN.
THERE ARE A LOT OF PEOPLE
OUT THERE
THAT AREN'T VERY BRIGHT.
-SHE WAS ON SOME MONKEY BARS
AT A PLAYGROUND.
FLIPPED BACKWARDS...
-THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
ATTRACTS A LOT OF PEOPLE
THAT ARE DOING,
FOR WHATEVER REASON,
VERY SILLY THINGS.
-FLIPPED BACKWARDS,
LOST HER GRIP, FELL BACK,
BANGED HER ARM,
AND THEN HEARD A SNAP,
ROLLED BACK.
SHE THINKS SHE MAY HAVE STRUCK
HER HEAD.
NO NECK PAIN OR BACK PAIN
RIGHT NOW.
-SO THE EXTENT OF HER INJURIES
ARE AN OPEN HUMERUS FRACTURE
HERE.
-AND SHE'S BEEN SICK.
-WHAT ARE YOU DOING
CLIMBING MONKEY BARS
AT A QUARTER AFTER MIDNIGHT
ON A FRIDAY NIGHT?
-[WHISPERING] SHE'S DRUNK.
-YOU KNOW, INITIALLY,
YOU NEVER KNOW
WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO GET
WHEN THE PATIENT ROLLS
THROUGH THE DOOR.
-SHE OBVIOUSLY
HAD AN ARM INJURY,
BUT WE'RE LOOKING
FOR THE LIFE-THREATENING THINGS,
INJURIES THAT MAY NOT BE
THAT OBVIOUS,
SO LUNGS, THE HEART,
THE ABDOMEN,
THE C SPINE OR NECK.
-AND ONE MORE TIME,
BIG BREATH IN, AND HOLD IT.
SO WE'RE LOOKING
AT YOUR INTERNAL ORGANS
TO JUST MAKE SURE
THERE'S NO BLEEDING IN THERE.
-OKAY.
-OUR JOB IS REALLY
TO RUN THROUGH OUR PROTOCOL
AND JUST MAKE SURE
THAT WE'RE RULING
THOSE THINGS OUT
AND MAKING SURE SHE'S STABLE.
[QUIET DISCUSSION]
SO, AT THE END,
WE'RE LEFT WITH INJURIES
THAT ARE MORE MANAGEABLE.
-NOW MOVE YOUR HAND
BACK AND FORTH.
CAN YOU MOVE YOUR WRIST
BACK AND FORTH?
OKAY, SORRY ABOUT THAT.
YOU OKAY THERE?
-WE GOT ULTRASOUNDS, X-RAYS.
NOTHING ELSE WE CAN IDENTIFY,
SO WE'RE PRETTY CONFIDENT
THAT THERE'S NO LIFE-THREATENING
INJURIES HERE.
SHE'S GOING TO HAVE TO HAVE
AN OPERATION TO FIX HER ARM,
TO REPAIR THIS AND WASH IT OUT,
AND MAKE SURE
IT DOESN'T GET INFECTED.
-SO, WAS THIS
A FALLING ACCIDENT TOO?
IS THIS A FAMILY THING?
FALLING OUT OF THINGS.
-THEY RECOGNIZE THEY'VE DONE
SOMETHING INCREDIBLY STUPID.
-SO ARE YOU DOING ALL RIGHT?
-YEAH.
-HAVING THE ABILITY TO LAUGH
AND SAY,
"YOU'RE GOING TO BE OKAY,"
THAT GOES A LONG WAY
TO REASSURING THEM
AND MAKING THEM FEEL BETTER.
PLUS, YOU'VE GOT TO HAVE FUN
AT WORK.
[ER RECEPTION CHATTER]
-DR. McKNIGHT,
WILL YOU BE MY VALENTINE?
[GIGGLING]
-WHAT DID YOU DO, MY DEAR?
-FELL OFF OF A CLIMBING WALL.
-OFF OF A CLIMBING WALL.
-AND THEN JUST--
THE ANKLE WENT UNDER.
-SO DID THEY THINK
IT WAS DISLOCATED?
-HE DIDN'T REALLY SAY
WHAT HE THOUGHT.
-OKAY, SO JUST YOUR FOOT DOWN.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO WEIGHT-BEAR
AT ALL ON THE OTHER.
EXCELLENT. GOOD JOB.
-THEY WERE ROCK CLIMBING
FOR VALENTINE'S DAY.
WHO DOES THAT?
ISN'T THERE, LIKE, CHOCOLATES
AND FLOWERS
AND DINNER INVOLVED?
-CAN YOU SCOOT YOURSELF UP?
-YEP.
-WE CLIMB A LOT,
SO IT WAS JUST LIKE,
"LET'S GO CLIMBING.
MAYBE IT WON'T BE BUSY
ON VALENTINE'S DAY."
-DID THE AMBULANCE
BRING YOU IN?
-YEAH, THEY DID.
YEAH, THEY WERE REALLY GOOD.
-CAN YOU WIGGLE
YOUR TOES FOR ME?
DOES THAT HURT?
-YEP.
-OKAY, WHERE IS THE PAIN?
-THE PAIN
IS ALL WHERE SHE'S LOOKING.
-ANY FEELING HERE?
DO YOU HAVE ANY PAIN HERE?
-NO.
-OKAY.
DO YOU HAVE ANY PAIN UP HERE?
-OH! YEAH!
-YOU DO HAVE PAIN HERE?
-BUT WHEN YOU DID THAT,
IT JUST SENT IT SHOOTING THERE.
-DO YOU HAVE SOME PAIN HERE?
BECAUSE DID YOU COME DOWN
LIKE THIS ON IT?
-I CAME DOWN, I THINK,
STRAIGHT,
AND THEN WHOA, YEAH.
IT WAS MY LAST ROUTE
THAT I WAS GOING TO DO
OF THE NIGHT,
AND I ALMOST DIDN'T GO ON,
AND WAS LIKE,
"OH, I'LL TRY ONE MORE TIME.
MAYBE I'LL GET IT."
AND, LIKE, MY HAND POPPED OFF.
MY FOOT ENDED UP COMING
UNDERNEATH ME,
SO THEN IT WAS LIKE POP, POP.
-TRY TO PLANT YOUR FOOT.
I WANT YOU TO TAKE YOUR FOOT
AND POINT IT DOWN.
CAN YOU?
[SHE WHIMPERS IN PAIN]
IT'S OKAY.
CAN YOU PULL IT UP TOWARDS YOU?
-NO.
-OKAY.
DO YOU HAVE ANY PAIN IN HERE?
-NO.
-OKAY.
-THEY ENDED UP CALLING
THE AMBULANCE,
AND IT WAS EMBARRASSING.
I HAD TO LEAVE ON A STRETCHER,
AND EVERYONE WAS LIKE,
"WHAT'S HAPPENING TO HER?"
AND THE FIRST TIME
I'D EVER BEEN IN AN AMBULANCE.
WAS IT THE FIRST TIME
YOU'VE BEEN IN AN AMBULANCE,
MATT?
-UH, YEAH, IT WAS.
-YEAH?
IT WAS A MERCEDES.
-I TOOK HER FOR A RIDE
IN A MERCEDES
ON VALENTINE'S DAY.
-YEAH, EXACTLY.
THANK YOU.
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-A LOT OF WHAT YOU DO
IN ANY JOB
DOES BECOME A BIT ROUTINE,
SO YOU'RE LOOKING
FOR THOSE THINGS
THAT ARE NOT ROUTINE,
THOSE THINGS THAT KEEP YOU
INTERESTED IN THE JOB.
I THINK THE CASES MOST OF US
LOOK FORWARD TO THE MOST
ARE THE CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS.
THOSE ARE THE MOST INTERESTING,
AND GIVE YOU A BIT
OF THE ADRENALIN SHOT.
THOSE ARE THE MOST EXCITING ONES
TO DEAL WITH.
-YEAH, I KNOW,
BUT WE'RE GOING TO TAKE REALLY
GOOD CARE OF YOU, THOUGH, OKAY?
-SHE'S A YOUNG WOMAN.
SHE HAD A SKI ACCIDENT,
WAS SEEN IN THE CLINIC,
WAS TRANSFERRED DOWN.
-WE WERE TOLD
THAT SHE WAS VERY STABLE,
AND SHE WAS.
-SO WE'RE GOING TO DO
SOME TESTS, OKAY?
-THE STORY YOU GET
WHEN THE PATIENTS
ARE TRANSFERRED DOWN
IS NOT OFTEN WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN THEY GET HERE.
THINGS CHANGE OVER TIME.
-ARE YOU DOING ALL RIGHT?
-ANY OF THE TRANSFER PATIENTS,
THE EMERG DOCS TEND TO EYEBALL
WHEN THEY GET HERE,
JUST TO MAKE SURE
EVERYTHING'S STABLE
AND THEY'RE OKAY.
WHEN I WENT TO CHECK ON HER,
INSTANTLY I KNEW SHE WASN'T.
SHE'S LOOKING WHITE
AS A GHOST.
SHE WAS VERY PALE,
AND HER BLOOD PRESSURE
WAS DROPPING.
-RIGHT WHEN SHE GOT HERE,
IT LOOKS
LIKE HER SPLEEN HAD RUPTURED,
AND SO SHE STARTED BLEEDING
QUITE FREELY
INTO HER ABDOMEN.
SO SHE ENDED UP
NOT BEING WELL AT ALL
AND VERY SICK.
[BEEP]
-WE STARTED GIVING HER BLOOD
RIGHT OFF THE BAT.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO TRY
AND GET HER BLOOD VOLUMES UP
AND TRY AND RESUSCITATE HER
QUICKLY.
WE'RE JUST GOING TO GET YOU
SOME PAINKILLERS, OKAY?
JUST SQUEEZE MY HAND
IF IT'S GETTING BAD, OKAY?
SHE'S A YOUNG WOMAN.
SHE WAS JUST PRETTY SCARED.
I KNOW THERE'S A LOT OF STUFF
BEEPING,
AND ON TV, BEEPING'S BAD.
DOWN HERE,
WE KIND OF IGNORE IT A LOT.
[MONITOR BEEPING]
ONCE YOU SEE US LOOKING WORRIED,
THEN YOU CAN WORRY.
[CHATTER AND DISCUSSION]
-IT CAN BE LIFE-THREATENING,
FOR CERTAIN.
OH, YEAH.
NO, IT'S VERY SERIOUS.
WE'RE TRYING TO DECIDE
EXACTLY WHETHER WE SHOULD
TAKE HER TO THE CT SCANNER
AND SCAN HER TO LOOK
AT THE EXTENT OF THE INJURY,
OR WHETHER SHE'S TOO SICK
TO HAVE THAT PROCEDURE DONE,
AND TO GO STRAIGHT
TO THE OPERATING ROOM.
-WE'RE GOING TO REASSESS?
-90% OF THE TIME,
PEOPLE COME IN
WITH NO DIAGNOSIS,
SO YOU'RE STARTING FROM SCRATCH,
YOU DON'T HAVE A LOT
OF INFORMATION,
YOU DON'T HAVE A RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE PATIENT
OR KNOW THEIR BACKGROUND.
YOU'RE REALLY TRYING TO GATHER
THOSE INFORMATION BITS
AND MAKE A DECISION VERY QUICKLY
IN TERMS OF WHAT'S WRONG
AND WHAT COULD BE
LIFE-THREATENING.
-I'VE JUST STARTED WORKING
AT VGH.
I CAME FROM A SMALL COMMUNITY
HOSPITAL EMERGENCY,
SO IT'S COMPLETELY DIFFERENT.
IT'S LIKE TWO DIFFERENT
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS,
AND I'VE COME FROM A CENTRE
THAT DOESN'T RECEIVE TRAUMA.
BEING TAUGHT HOW TO HANDLE
A TRAUMA WHEN IT COMES IN
IS A BIT DIFFERENT
WHEN IT ACTUALLY SHOWS UP
AT YOUR FEET
AND YOU HAVE TO DEAL WITH IT.
-YOU'RE DOING OKAY, ALL RIGHT?
JUST KEEP BREATHING.
YOU LET US KNOW
IF YOU HAVE TOO MUCH PAIN.
[MONITORS BEEP]
AH, SO SHE'S HAD TWO OF THESE?
-THIS IS THE THIRD
GOING IN NOW.
SHE HAD BLED SO MUCH
THAT SHE'S NO LONGER ABLE
TO SUPPORT HER BLOOD PRESSURE.
BASICALLY, YOU'VE GOT PIPES.
THEY NEED TO BE FULL OF BLOOD.
SO WHEN YOU LOSE BLOOD
INTO THE ABDOMEN,
THERE'S NOT BLOOD GOING ANYWHERE
ELSE.
UNLESS YOU TREAT IT QUICKLY,
IT CAN GET PRETTY BAD.
-I THINK ALL OF US
IN THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
HAVE HAD SHIFTS
THAT HAVE SCARED US,
WHERE YOU WIND UP
WITH A VERY SICK PATIENT.
THE JOB ENTAILS
A LOT OF TOUGH DECISIONS.
SOMETIMES
YOU'RE GOING TO BE WRONG.
[MONITOR BEEPING;
LOW HUM OF DISCUSSION]
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-WE THINK
SHE'S NOT STABLE ENOUGH
TO GO TO THE CT SCANNER.
WE'RE GOING STRAIGHT
TO THE OPERATING ROOM.
-SO WE'RE MAKING
THE CALL FOR THE OR.
-OKAY.
-ARE YOU?
-YEAH.
-FOR A LAP?
-LAPAROTOMY'S SET UP,
TRAUMA LAP.
-ALL RIGHT. HERE WE GO.
-WHEN YOU OPERATE,
VERY OFTEN, YOU HAVE TO ACTUALLY
TAKE THE SPLEEN OUT,
BUT I'M HOPING BEYOND HOPE
WE CAN SAVE THE SPLEEN.
-WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO OPEN
HER UP,
FIND THE SOURCE OF THE BLEEDING,
CONTROL THAT.
-OH, REALLY?
-SHE'S ALREADY ON IT.
-SHE'S A YOUNG WOMAN.
SHE'S GOT A LOT GOING FOR HER
IN TERMS OF THE PREDICTORS
OF A POSITIVE OUTCOME,
SO MY GUESS IS
SHE'LL DO WELL.
-THIS CASE IS SIGNIFICANT
BECAUSE
THAT WAS MY FIRST TRAUMA,
ACTUALLY, AS AN RN,
SO THAT WAS VERY STRESSFUL
FOR ME.
I HAD TO START USING EVERYTHING
I'D BEEN TAUGHT
IN FRONT OF OTHER PEOPLE, YEAH,
NOT JUST GOING OVER IT
IN MY HEAD.
I THOUGHT IT WENT REALLY WELL.
IT'S THE PERFECT BABY STEP
IN THE DIRECTION
OF TRAUMA NURSING AT VGH.
[SIREN WAILS]
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-INTOXICATED.
-YEAH, SHE'S VERY DRUNK.
SHE STARTED DOING THE GESTURES
AND VOMITING,
AND VOMITED IN HER HANDS
AND THEN SWALLOWED IT.
-NICE.
WHY WASTE IT?
[LAUGHS]
-AND THEN I GAVE HER A BUCKET
AND SAID,
"DON'T YOU PUKE ON MY FLOOR,"
AND GAVE HER THE BUCKET.
-CAN YOU CALL IT VOMIT
IF YOU SWALLOW IT AGAIN?
-YOU KNOW, THAT TAKES TALENT
TO SWALLOW YOUR OWN VOMIT.
-I CAME IN BECAUSE I SLICED
MY FINGER REALLY BAD.
-OKAY, LET'S HAVE A LOOK.
OH, YOU DID A GOOD JOB THERE,
EH?
YOU JUST NEED SOME STITCHES.
-YES.
I WAS AT HOME, OPENING UP
SOME PLASTIC PACKAGING,
AND LIKE I TELL MY DAUGHTER
ALL THE TIME
TO USE THE SCISSORS,
I WAS USING A KNIFE,
AND I PROCEEDED TO STAB MYSELF
IN THE FINGER
AND CUT IT RIGHT DOWN
ALMOST TO THE BONE,
WHICH IS NOT COOL.
IT COULD HAVE BEEN
TOTALLY AVOIDED
IF I'D USED SCISSORS.
-SO IS YOUR DAUGHTER
DOING OKAY OUT THERE?
-I BELIEVE SHE'S DOING FINE.
-DID THEY DELIVER
TO THE ER HERE?
-THEY DELIVERED, ACTUALLY,
PIZZA TO THE ER.
I WAS QUITE AMAZED.
-MY MIDDLE DAUGHTER
IS AROUND THE SAME AGE...
-OKAY.
-AND SHE'S REALLY FASCINATED
BY THIS STUFF.
-MY DAUGHTER IS TOO, ACTUALLY.
SHE WANTED TO SEE
WHAT I'D DONE.
SHE DOESN'T GET FREAKED OUT
BY THIS KIND OF STUFF AT ALL.
-I'D LIKE TO JUST EXPLORE
IN THERE
AND MAKE SURE THAT, VISIBLY,
THE TENDON LOOKS ALL RIGHT
AS WELL,
THAT IT ISN'T PARTIALLY CUT.
-YEP.
-WELL, IT LOOKS
LIKE YOU'RE LUCKY.
IT STOPPED JUST SUPERFICIAL
TO THE TENDON.
-SWEET.
-SO IT'S FAIRLY DEEP,
BUT YOU DIDN'T GET THE TENDON.
-SWEET.
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-IT'S ONE OF THE MORE COMMON
PROCEDURES THAT WE DO
IN THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT.
SO PROBABLY, ON AVERAGE,
TWO OR THREE TIMES A SHIFT.
-THEY DID A REALLY GOOD JOB
AND... ALL STITCHED UP,
AND GOT MY TETANUS SHOT,
AND I'M ALL GOOD TO GO.
LESSON LEARNED--
USE SCISSORS.
[CHUCKLES]
-HE WAS OXYGENATING REALLY WELL
UNTIL HE STOPPED BREATHING,
SO...
-RESPIRATORY THERAPY
IS SORT OF LIKE A SPECIALTY
WITHIN THE HOSPITAL.
WE'RE NOT DOCTORS.
WE'RE NOT NURSES.
IT'S MORE LIKE
AN EXTRA SERVICE.
WE HAVE OUR OWN SPECIFIC SET
OF SKILLS.
WE RUN THE VENTILATORS.
WE MANAGE THE BREATHING TUBES.
WE HELP ANYONE
WHO NEEDS OXYGEN.
YOU HAVE TO THINK ON YOUR FEET,
AND YOU GET TO BE
PART OF THE DIAGNOSIS.
I LOVE THAT VARIETY.
I LOVE THAT UNPREDICTABILITY,
AND EMERG IS ABSOLUTELY
THE BEST EXAMPLE OF THAT.
-OKAY, SO, UM...
-JUST OPEN YOUR EYES.
[BEEPING]
-HE'S MOVING AROUND
A LITTLE BIT NOW.
-THIS PATIENT
HAD POTENTIALLY OVERDOSED
ON A NUMBER OF MEDICINES.
THEY WEREN'T WAKING UP,
AND SO WE BECAME
INCREASINGLY CONCERNED
THAT THEIR ABILITY TO PROTECT
THE AIRWAY
WAS GOING TO BE COMPROMISED.
-LET'S... LET'S START IT.
WE DECIDED TO TAKE OVER
THE PATIENT'S BREATHING
BY PUTTING IN A BREATHING TUBE
AND CONNECTING THE PATIENT
TO A VENTILATOR.
[CHATTER AND DISCUSSION]
-I'M JUST NOT GETTING
A GOOD SEAL.
IT'S, LIKE, BLOCKING
BECAUSE I CAN'T MOVE HIS HEAD.
-OPEN.
DO YOU WANT US
TO JUST TAKE IT OUT?
-YES, PLEASE.
-ON A SEMI-REGULAR BASIS,
YOU'LL GET SOMETHING IN
THAT'S REALLY TRICKY,
SOMETHING WHERE
IT'S EXTREMELY DIFFICULT
FOR A VARIETY OF REASONS.
-HE'S HAD PREVIOUS NECK SURGERY,
SO THERE'S NO NECK MOBILITY
AVAILABLE.
-SO HE CAN'T TURN HIS HEAD
ANY WAY AT ALL.
NOT BEING ABLE TO MOVE THE HEAD
IS A PRETTY BIG DEAL
WHEN IT COMES TO PUTTING IN
AN AIRWAY.
I CAN'T GET HIS MOUTH
OPEN ENOUGH.
-SO AT THAT POINT,
WE SOUGHT THE EXPERTISE
OF OUR ON-CALL
ANESTHESIA SPECIALIST,
AND THAT WAS DR. CHOI.
-WE STARTED IN
ON SOME OF THE MORE SPECIALIZED
EQUIPMENT,
THE BRONCHOSCOPE.
IT'S SORT OF LIKE A CAMERA
ON THE END OF A FLEXIBLE TUBE.
YOU CAN ACTUALLY
SNAKE DOWN THE AIRWAY
INTO THE LUNGS
AND GUIDE THE BREATHING TUBE
OVERTOP OF THAT
ONCE YOU'VE GOT IT
IN THE RIGHT SPOT.
-I JUST CAN'T SEE.
COME ON, LET ME IN.
-IF WE'RE NOT SUCCESSFUL,
WE MAY NEED TO DO AN EMERGENT
CRICOTHYROIDOTOMY,
WHICH IS A SURGICAL AIRWAY
ON THE FRONT OF THE NECK,
TO PLACE A TUBE
IN OFF THE SKIN.
-THAT'S SORT OF LIKE THE 10
ON THE SCALE OF 1 TO 10.
-STATS ARE...
-STATS ARE DROPPING.
-WELL, ORIGINALLY,
MY GIRLFRIEND AND I HAD
VALENTINE'S DAY PLANS
AT MY HOUSE,
BUT SHE'D BEEN SICK THE WEEK
BEFORE,
AND SHE WENT TO HER DOCTOR
TODAY.
THE DOCTOR RECOMMENDED
THAT SHE GO TO VGH.
-I HAVE A BUNCH OF DIFFERENT
CONDITIONS ALREADY, SO...
THEN MY LEGS JUST KIND OF
STOPPED WORKING PROPERLY,
SO THEN I CAN'T REALLY
MOVE MY NECK AND STUFF,
SO THEY'RE JUST TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT WHY,
AND WHEN I TRY TO MOVE MY LEGS,
IT GOES, LIKE, JERKY, LIKE THAT,
SO... WHO KNOWS?
-SO I'M JUST HERE TODAY,
HONESTLY,
TO KIND OF CARRY ON
WITH THE PLANS,
JUST A DIFFERENT SETTING
LOCATION.
-SO, WHAT I DID HERE...
NOW, MY MOM PACKED IT.
I HAVE NO IDEA
IF IT'S STILL INTACT.
THERE'S JUST THESE COOKIES
YOU CAN MAKE INTO WORDS
AND LETTERS.
-SO I HAD WRITTEN
AN "I LOVE YOU, SARAH."
THEY GREW IN SIZE,
LIKE, TWICE AS BIG
AS THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO BE.
OH, THE U BROKE.
-I UNDERSTAND.
-AND THEN YOUR NAME
UNDERNEATH.
S-A-R-A-H.
-OH, THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
-HAPPY VALENTINE'S DAY.
-FANTASTIC VALENTINE'S DAY.
THANKS FOR COMING.
-OF COURSE.
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-SHE SEEMED
LIKE SHE WAS... OKAY.
I MEAN, IT'S AN ONGOING THING,
SO IT'S NOT SUDDEN
OUT OF NOWHERE,
BUT IT'S ALWAYS WORRYING, SO...
[♪♪♪♪♪]
[SLOW BEEPING]
-SO, NORMALLY,
WHEN WE INTUBATE A PATIENT,
WE'RE ABLE TO KIND OF PULL
THEIR HEAD UP INTO A POSITION
WHERE WE CAN VISUALIZE
THEIR VOCAL CORDS.
-BECAUSE THERE WAS SOME
PREVIOUS SURGERY TO THE NECK,
THERE WAS NO ABILITY
TO MOVE THE NECK.
HE TRIED WITH THE FIBREOPTIC,
BUT UNFORTUNATELY,
IT WAS STILL REALLY DIFFICULT
TO SEE.
-THINGS WERE QUITE SWOLLEN
IN THERE,
AND HE JUST WASN'T ABLE
TO MANIPULATE IT
TO GET IT INTO THE SPOT
WHERE HE COULD SEE
WHERE THE ACTUAL TRACHEA IS.
-COME OUT OF THERE
FOR A SECOND.
-OKAY.
-OKAY, LET'S BACK OFF
AND BAG HIM UP FOR A SECOND,
GUYS.
-YOU GUYS
STILL HAVE LIGHT WANDS?
THE WHITE ONES?
-YOU MEAN, LIKE,
A LIGHTED STYLET?
YEAH.
-ESSENTIALLY, YOU JUST START
THROWING EVERYTHING,
INCLUDING THE KITCHEN SINK,
AT THE PROBLEM
UNTIL YOU FIND SOMETHING
THAT WORKS.
-YEAH, WE DO.
HERE'S WHAT YOU MEAN, RIGHT?
-THE LIGHT WAND, WHICH,
ACTUALLY, I HAVEN'T SEEN USED
SINCE I STARTED WORKING.
THE LAST TIME I SAW IT,
I WAS A STUDENT.
-OKAY, I'LL TELL YOU WHEN.
ALL RIGHT, LET'S SEE
IF WE CAN DO THAT.
-IT HAS A LIGHT
ON THE END OF IT,
AND SO YOU PUT
THE BREATHING TUBE OVERTOP,
AND THEN YOU GUIDE IT
TOWARDS THE AIRWAY.
-CAN WE GET THE LIGHTS OFF,
PLEASE?
-IS THAT OKAY, GUYS?
-IF WE COULD KILL THOSE ONES
THERE,
I'D APPRECIATE IT.
-YEAH, THAT'S GREAT.
THANK YOU.
-THE ONLY REASON WE TURN OFF
THE LIGHTS
IS BECAUSE YOU CAN SEE THE LIGHT
THROUGH THE NECK.
[BEEPING]
-SO, OFF TO THE LEFT...
AND CENTRE.
-AND THEN WHEN YOU'RE SEEING
THE LIGHT
COMING THROUGH THE NECK,
YOU KNOW
IT'S IN THE RIGHT SPOT.
-LOOKS GOOD.
-YEP.
-LIGHTS BACK ON, PLEASE.
-AND THAT'S HOW WE EVENTUALLY
GOT THE TUBE IN.
-THANK YOU SO MUCH.
NICE WORK, DR. CHOI.
IT'S KIND OF A RUSH, YEAH.
I MEAN, WE, OF COURSE,
DON'T WANT ANYONE
TO BE SICK LIKE THAT,
BUT, I MEAN,
IT'S EXCITING SOMETIMES,
AND IT'S EXCITING
WHEN IT SUCCEEDS, ESPECIALLY,
SO...
MOST RTs WILL SAY
THAT THEY KIND OF LIVE OFF
THAT STUFF.
-AT THE START OF A SHIFT,
I WONDER WHAT'S COMING IN TODAY.
I WONDER HOW THE DAY WILL GO,
BECAUSE YOU REALLY NEVER KNOW.
UNLIKE A LOT OF OTHER CAREERS,
WHERE YOU CAN KIND OF LOOK AHEAD
AT YOUR SCHEDULE
AND KNOW WHAT'S COMING IN NEXT
AND KNOW WHAT YOUR DAY'S GOING
TO BE LIKE,
OR AT LEAST HAVE A SENSE OF IT,
WE REALLY NEVER KNOW
WHAT'S COMING IN,
AND SO IN A LOT OF WAYS,
I FIND THAT REALLY EXCITING.
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-KNOCK, KNOCK.
-THERE ARE OCCASIONALLY
SOME SITUATIONS
WHERE AN ER STAFF MEMBER
WOULD BE TREATED
IN OUR DEPARTMENT.
-I TOOK OUT A PATIENT'S IV
AND WENT TO THROW IT
IN THE GARBAGE,
AND THE BLOOD THAT HANGS
AT THE END OF THE IV CANNULA
FLICKED BACK INTO MY EYE.
-THE EYE'S A PORTAL
OF INFECTION,
SO I HAVE TO GET TRIAGED
AND SEE THE DOCTOR,
GET SOME BLOODWORK DONE,
JUST LIKE A REGULAR PATIENT.
-IF THEIR LIFESTYLE
IS CONSIDERED HIGH-RISK,
THEN I WOULD BE MORE AFRAID.
I'D BE REALLY SCARED, RIGHT?
BECAUSE, ULTIMATELY,
IT AFFECTS YOU,
AND IT MIGHT AFFECT THE PEOPLE
AROUND YOU
THAT YOU LOVE, RIGHT?
-YEAH.
-BUT, YOU KNOW, HOPEFULLY--
HOPEFULLY, IT'S NOT.
PATIENTS COME IN
WITH ALL KINDS OF THINGS,
AND THEY DON'T NECESSARILY
TELL YOU
THAT THEY'RE HIV,
THAT THEY'RE HEPATITIS-POSITIVE,
THAT THEY HAVE TB,
OR WHATEVER DISEASE IT IS
THAT COULD BE COMMUNICABLE.
SO JUST
TAKE YOUR STUFF WITH YOU,
AND JUST GO--
-WHO'S IN TRIAGE TODAY?
-OH, UM... DR. GILL, I THINK.
-IT'S, TECHNICALLY,
QUITE AN EMERGENCY
BECAUSE YOU NEED TO START
THE MEDICATIONS
WITHIN A CERTAIN TIME PERIOD
FOR THEM TO BE MOST EFFECTIVE,
SO I HAVE TO SEE THE DOCTOR
QUITE QUICKLY.
-THE CLOCK
IS TICK, TICK, TICK, TICK.
-I KNOW.
[LOW HUM OF CHATTER]
-I STILL HAVEN'T HEARD...
-THEY'VE CALLED BACK.
-OH, I'M SORRY.
I WAS BUSY.
I FEEL TERRIBLE.
-YOU SHOULD FEEL TERRIBLE.
[LINE RINGS]
-HI...
THANKS. BYE.
-HOW CAN I MAKE IT UP TO YOU?
-I DON'T KNOW.
-CAN WE GO ON VACATION, MAYBE?
-[GASPS] LET'S DO THAT!
-AS EMERG DOCS, WE SEE PROBABLY
THE MOST PATIENTS
BESIDES FAMILY PRACTICE DOCTORS.
I MEAN, IT'S PARTICULAR
TO A PLACE LIKE HERE.
WE SEE A SUBSET OF PATIENTS
THAT ARE REALLY, REALLY SICK.
[MONITOR BEEPS]
SO HOW MUCH BLOOD WAS THERE?
SO WAS THERE BYSTANDER CPR?
AND DO WE KNOW WHAT TIME
SHE GOT STABBED?
I GOT A PHONE CALL
FROM AN AMBULANCE
THAT WAS ON THE SCENE SOMEWHERE
IN NORTH VANCOUVER
WITH A PATIENT
WITH A VERY SERIOUS
PENETRATING TRAUMA WOUND.
ARE THERE SIX LITRES
OF BLOOD ON THE GROUND?
THERE'S A CHANCE
THAT THERE MIGHT BE
ENOUGH BLOOD CIRCULATING,
WITH APPROPRIATE CPR,
THE PATIENT TO HAVE A CHANCE.
20-YEAR-OLD FEMALE.
AND WHAT'S YOUR TRANSPORT TIME?
40 MINUTES.
SO IS IT JUST ONE PENETRATING
WOUND TO THE ABDOMEN?
OKAY.
YEAH, THEN GO AHEAD
AND TRANSPORT HER.
GIVEN THAT
IT'S A YOUNG PERSON,
IT'S WORTH TO AT LEAST GIVE HER
A FIGHTING CHANCE.
IN A 21-YEAR-OLD
WITH A STORY LIKE THAT,
WE'VE JUST GOT TO DO IT.
BYE.
WE'RE
THE LEVEL 1 TRAUMA CENTRE
FOR THE LOWER MAINLAND,
SO IF THIS PATIENT HAS A CHANCE
OF SURVIVAL,
TO COME HERE
WILL BE OUR BEST CHANCE.
-WE'RE GETTING
A SECOND STABBING COMING IN.
SO WE'RE POTENTIALLY GETTING
TWO PEOPLE.
-YEAH.
-THE DISPATCHER, HE SAID
THEY SHOULD BE CALLING US
TO LET US KNOW,
BUT AS FAR AS HE KNOWS,
RIGHT NOW
THERE'S TWO COMING HERE.
-OKAY.
-HE DOESN'T KNOW THE EXTENT
OF THE INJURIES.
-OKAY.
SO TWO MORE ON TOP OF THE GIRL,
OR INCLUDING THE GIRL.
-NO, TWO, TWO, TWO.
-IN TOTAL,
GIRL AND ANOTHER ONE.
SO IT SOUNDS LIKE
THERE'S ANOTHER VICTIM NOW.
SO DO WE HAVE TWO TRAUMA BAYS?
-YEAH, WE DO, ONE AND TWO.
-SO NOW WE'VE GOT
TWO STABBINGS COMING IN.
WE'LL SEE WHAT HAPPENS.
-THANK YOU.
-OPEN YOUR FIST NOW.
-I'M STARTING
TO HAVE RENEWED EMPATHY
FOR PATIENTS NOW,
GETTING POKED.
-ALMOST DONE.
-HI, KATHERINE.
I'M DR. GILL.
I'M ONE
OF THE EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS.
HOW ARE YOU DOING?
-HI. GOOD.
I DON'T THINK
WE'VE WORKED TOGETHER YET.
-I DON'T THINK SO.
-I JUST STARTED HERE.
-OH, WELL, WELCOME.
-THANK YOU.
-I'M SORRY
THAT WE'RE MEETING...
-LIKE THIS.
WE'RE NOT SUPPOSED
TO BE THE PATIENTS.
-I KNOW.
-AND I UNDERSTAND
YOU WERE DISCARDING AN IV...
-YEAH.
-AND A BIT OF BLOOD
SPLASHED BACK TO YOU?
-YEP.
-AND IT GOT YOU
RIGHT IN THE EYE?
-I DIDN'T SEE IT,
BUT AS SOON AS I THREW IT,
I FELT THE FLUID.
-OKAY.
WHAT I WOULD NORMALLY RECOMMEND
IS THAT WE IRRIGATE IT OUT.
I THINK IT'S PROBABLY
THE BEST THING THAT WE CAN DO.
-YEAH.
I HAVE TO SIT THERE
WITH A BAG OF SALINE,
FLUSHING FLUID OUT OF MY EYE.
LET'S SEE
IF I CAN DO IT MYSELF.
-GETTING SPLASHED IN THE EYE
WITH A STRANGER'S BLOOD
IS NEVER A PLEASANT EXPERIENCE.
YOU THINK
ABOUT THE PATIENT'S BLOOD.
YOU THINK ABOUT,
"ARE THEY HIGH-RISK PATIENTS?
WHAT'S THE CHANCE
THEY HAVE HIV, HEPATITIS C?"
SOMETHING TO WORRY ABOUT.
-DID YOU PUT THAT IN THERE
BY YOURSELF?
-YEAH.
-OH, MY GOODNESS.
DID YOU PUT TETRACAINE IN?
-UH, NO.
-IS IT DRIVING YOUR EYE NUTS?
-IT'S NOT TOO BAD.
-OKAY.
-THIS IS ACTUALLY FOR THE CDC,
THE CENTRE FOR DISEASE CONTROL,
IN CASE ANYTHING TURNS UP
POSITIVE,
WHICH I HOPE IT WON'T.
IT IS ALWAYS GOING TO BE
IN THE BACK OF YOUR MIND
FOR THE NEXT LITTLE WHILE.
YOU HAVE TO GET FOLLOWED-UP
FOR NINE MONTHS
DOING BLOOD TESTS.
-YOU SAID YOUR TETANUS
WAS UP TO DATE.
-YEP.
-HIV STATUS AND HEPATITIS B
WILL GET FOLLOWED IN BLOODWORK,
AND HEP C,
WE HAVE NO TREATMENT FOR.
DO YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS?
-NO.
-OKAY, AND YOU'VE GOT EVERYTHING
TO FOLLOW UP?
-I'VE GOT EVERYTHING.
-IT'S JUST ONE OF THOSE THINGS.
IT'S "EW, GROSS.
WHY DID THIS HAVE TO HAPPEN
TO ME?"
-YEAH, I KNOW.
OKAY, THANK YOU.
-THANKS.
SEE YOU.
-BYE.
-IF IT WAS HIGH-RISK,
I'D HAVE TO GO
ON THE ANTI-RETROVIRALS
AND MEDICATIONS TO STOP,
WHICH, I'VE HEARD,
HAS PRETTY NASTY SIDE EFFECTS.
SENDING MY BLOOD TO THE LAB
TO GET TESTED
FOR HIV,
HEP C, AND HEP B.
GOOD.
DONE.
I CAN GO BACK TO WORK NOW.
HAVING TO WAIT
FOR BLOOD TEST RESULTS
DEFINITELY MAKES YOU LOSE
A COUPLE NIGHTS' SLEEP.
I MEAN, IT'S UNFORTUNATELY
A HAZARD OF THE JOB.
I MEAN, THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT CAN'T REALLY BE PREDICTED
OR PREVENTED.
IT HAPPENS.
-THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
IS KIND OF A LIVE ENTITY.
IT'S ALMOST
A BIOLOGICAL SYSTEM,
WITH MULTIPLE DIFFERENT PATIENTS
THAT YOU'RE MANAGING
OR CARING FOR AT THE SAME TIME.
SOMEBODY MIGHT BE RECEIVING
IV ANTIBIOTICS
FOR SEVERE PNEUMONIA.
SOMEBODY MIGHT BE INVESTIGATED
FOR A POTENTIAL HEART ATTACK,
AND SO THAT SORT
OF DYNAMIC WORLD
IS VERY UNIQUE
TO EMERGENCY MEDICINE,
AND I THINK IT SETS IT APART
FROM OTHER FIELDS OF MEDICINE.
-TWO STABBING VICTIMS,
10, 20 MINUTES OUT.
ONE IS IN TRAUMATIC ARREST,
JUST SO YOU KNOW.
THERE ARE GOING TO BE
TWO VICTIMS AT THE SAME TIME.
-LET'S GET THIS JOB DONE.
-ALL RIGHT?
-SO, WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO NOW
IS WE'RE GOING
TO ACTIVATE THE TRAUMA TEAM.
-AND THAT'S WHEN I START DOING
ALL MY NOTIFICATIONS
TO GET THE RIGHT PEOPLE.
-A HEADS-UP
THAT WE'VE GOT TWO TRAUMAS
COMING IN,
ONE OF THEM
DEFINITELY BY CHOPPER.
I'LL LET YOU KNOW
WHEN THEY FINALLY ARRIVE,
BUT IT'S PART OF THE TRAUMA TEAM
ACTIVATION.
THANKS. BYE.
OKAY.
-NOW WE'RE GOING TO CALL IN
OUR COLLEAGUES
FROM THE TRAUMA SERVICE
AND THE RESIDENT TEAM
TO COME AND HELP US OUT.
-SOMETIMES IT'S THE CASES
THAT ARE THE MOST CRITICAL
THAT ARE ACTUALLY EASIER
BECAUSE CERTAIN PROTOCOLS
JUST COME INTO PLAY.
-TRAUMA TEAM ACTIVATION.
I'M JUST GIVING YOU
THE HEADS-UP.
-WITH A SITUATION LIKE THIS,
WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE
THAT OUR SAFETY IS MAINTAINED.
-NICOLE?
ARE YOU PUTTING US ON LOCKDOWN?
-SO WE ACTUALLY HAVE TO HAVE
POLICE.
WE HAVE SECURITY TO MAKE SURE
THAT IN A STAB WOUND SITUATION,
ONE OF THE VICTIMS
ISN'T A CRIMINAL,
AND THAT THERE'S NOT
OTHER "RELATIVES"
THAT COULD COME AFTER EITHER
THE PATIENT OR THE CAREGIVER.
-I HAVEN'T GOT THE DETAILS YET.
AS SOON AS I FIND OUT,
WE'LL LET YOU KNOW.
NICOLE SPEAKING.
-AND THE OTHER CONSIDERATION
FOR US
IS THAT
WHILE
THERE'S A BIG, DRAMATIC EVENT
GOING ON,
THERE'S OTHER SICK PATIENTS
IN THE DEPARTMENT,
SO WHILE OUR ENERGIES
GET FOCUSED
ON THE TWO SICKEST PATIENTS,
WE DON'T WANT TO FORGET
THE REST OF THE DEPARTMENT,
WHICH COULD BE VERY ACTIVE,
SO THAT'S
WHAT I'M GOING TO DO NOW,
TRY TO TIDY UP EVERYTHING.
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-WE DON'T KNOW
WHEN THEY'RE COMING, DO WE?
-HMM?
-WE DON'T KNOW
WHEN THEY'RE COMING.
-NO, WE DON'T KNOW.
-YEAH.
-HE JUST STARTED DEVELOPING
NUMBNESS IN HIS RIGHT LEG
ON FRIDAY,
AND IT INCREASINGLY GOT WORSE
THROUGH SATURDAY,
AND THEN SUNDAY, HE HAD
NO STRENGTH IN IT WHATSOEVER.
-I'VE LOST ALL THE STRENGTH
IN MY LEGS,
AND MY DOCTOR UP IN TERRACE
LAST NIGHT
MENTIONED LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE
AND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
AND A WHOLE BUNCH
OF NICE THINGS.
-TODAY I GOT WORD
THAT HE WAS BEING FLOWN DOWN
FROM TERRACE.
THEY RAN A BUNCH OF TESTS,
AND IT HAS BEEN DIAGNOSED NOW.
HE'S GOT GUILLAIN-BARRE
SYNDROME.
-I HAD THE FLU LAST WEEK,
AND THEY SAY IT HAPPENS
AFTER YOU'VE HAD SOMETHING
LIKE THAT.
THIS OTHER SYMPTOM COMES ON,
AND IT'S WHERE YOUR ANTIBODIES
THAT COME
TO FIGHT THE FLU I HAD
DON'T WANT TO GIVE UP
AFTER THE FLU'S GONE AWAY.
THEY THINK, "WELL, SHIT.
WE'VE STILL GOT OTHER THINGS
TO DO IN THIS BODY,"
SO THEY START ATTACKING
YOUR SPINAL CORD.
-IT CAN AFFECT
YOUR RESPIRATORY.
IT CAN CAUSE YOU
TO BECOME A QUADRIPLEGIC,
BUT THEY FEEL CONFIDENT
THAT THEY CAUGHT IT EARLY ENOUGH
THAT HE'LL BE FINE.
-THEY KNOW WHAT'S THE MATTER.
THEY'RE GOING TO TREAT ME
FOR IT.
THEY FIGURE IT'LL TAKE
ABOUT FOUR DAYS OF TREATMENT,
AND THEN
THEY'LL BE MONITORING ME.
IT'S KIND OF NICE JUST TO KNOW
THAT YES, THEY CAN CURE IT.
-AND SO NOW
I'M JUST BASICALLY TRYING
TO KEEP MY BROTHER AMUSED
SO HE DOESN'T DRIVE
THE NURSING STAFF CRAZY, SO...
-SO I'VE BEEN JOKING
WITH THE LADIES
ABOUT WATCHING THE CANUCKS GAME.
I WON'T GET UP TO THE ROOM
FOR A WHILE,
SO I WAS GOING TO SNEAK OUT
AROUND THE CORNER.
-HE'S A GREAT CANUCKS FAN,
SO WE'RE GOING TO TAKE HIM OUT
TO THE WAITING ROOM
SO HE CAN WATCH A BIT
OF THE CANUCKS GAME
WHILE WE'RE WAITING FOR HIM
TO GO UPSTAIRS TO HIS BED.
-THIS WOULD BE EVEN BETTER
IF I HAD A WHITE SPOT BEER
IN MY HAND.
-WE SEE LOTS OF PATIENTS
COMING IN HERE.
THEY'RE SICK.
THEY HAVE NO CHOICE
BUT TO BE HERE.
SOME OF THEM STILL HAVE
THE POSITIVE ATTITUDE
TO JUST WANT
TO WATCH THE HOCKEY GAME
INSTEAD OF FOCUSING
ON THEIR HEALTH,
WHICH IS GOOD.
-I DON'T KNOW
IF THIS IS GOING TO WORK.
YESTERDAY, I COULD WALK.
TODAY, I CAN'T.
-HOLD ON. HOLD ON. NO--
-GOT IT.
-I'VE GOT NO STRENGTH,
YOU GUYS.
I'VE GOT NOTHING.
NO, NO, NO.
-NO, LET HIM GO BACK IN.
-I CAN'T.
-OKAY. CAN YOU GET BACK IN?
-YOU CAN'T GO WATCH IT.
[GRUNTS IN PAIN]
-AW.
-NO CANUCK GAME.
-THAT'S TOO BAD.
-I DON'T HAVE THE STRENGTH.
I JUST CAN'T GET MY DARN LEGS
TO WORK,
BUT WHEN I GET UP IN MY ROOM,
I'LL ORDER A TV UP, AND MAYBE
THEY CAN GET IT IN FOR ME.
YEAH. YEAH.
NO, I'LL GET IT YET.
IT GOES ON FOR A LONG TIME.
-JUST CALL HIS OFFICE.
SHIT.
KERRY, YOU KNOCKED OVER
MY CHART.
-I WAS STANDING OVER HERE!
-[CHUCKLING]
-I CALL HER "CARE BEAR."
SHE'S CARE BEAR.
I'M "ROSE PETAL."
-BOO BOO.
-BOO BOO...
NO, NOT BOO BOO.
NO "FOO FOO."
NO "PRINCESS."
-OR SHOULD WE TRY
AND GET HIM IN...?
-I'D BRING HIM FIRST,
BECAUSE THEY'RE PROBABLY
10 TO 15 OUT.
-OKAY, SURE.
-OKAY?
SO WE INITIALLY THOUGHT
THAT WE WERE GETTING
TWO PATIENTS, UNRELATED,
BUT BOTH VICTIMS
OF STABBING,
AND WITH BOTH PATIENTS
IN THEIR 20s.
-WELL, THEY TOLD ME
SHE WAS 21, BUT ANYWAY...
WE HAD HEARD ABOUT THAT TIME
THAT IT WAS ACTUALLY
A YOUNGER PATIENT.
-SO THEY'RE TELLING ME NOW
THAT THE SECOND PATIENT
IS ACTUALLY A CHILD.
-DO WE KNOW HOW OLD
THE CHILD IS?
-I DON'T KNOW.
-THAT'S AWFUL.
-SO ARE THEY BRINGING HER HERE?
-UM...
-USUALLY,
SOMEBODY OF THAT AGE GROUP
WOULD BE TAKEN
TO B.C. CHILDREN
AND WOULD NOT COME DIRECTLY
TO VANCOUVER GENERAL.
[PHONE RINGS]
-I'LL GO PICK UP THAT RED PHONE
AND ASK HIM.
-OKAY.
-HI. IT'S KERRY CALLING
FROM VGH EMERGENCY.
JUST WONDERING
ABOUT THE AIRLIFT VICTIMS
THAT ARE COMING.
DO YOU GUYS HAVE ANY ETA
ON WHAT'S HAPPENING?
OKAY.
-I WON'T DRESS DOWN
UNTIL I KNOW.
-OKAY, PERFECT.
THANK YOU. BYE.
OKAY...
-SO WHICH PATIENT?
-SO THE ADULT IS BEING
AIRLIFTED HERE.
THE CHILD IS GOING
TO CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL.
-DO THEY EVEN HAVE
A TRAUMA TEAM LIKE THIS?
-SO NOW THE QUESTION IS,
WITH A PENETRATING WOUND
IN A CHILD,
CAN THEY HANDLE THAT KIND
OF TRAUMA AT CHILDREN'S?
WELL,
I MEAN, IT IS PENETRATING.
THEY TOLD ME IT WAS.
SO WE NEED TO DOUBLE-CHECK
WITH CHILDREN
IF THEY HAVE A TRAUMA TEAM
THAT CAN HANDLE
PENETRATING TRAUMA,
BECAUSE THEY MIGHT JUST WANT
TO DIVERT TO US.
THEY MAY NOT BE EQUIPPED
TO DEAL WITH THAT THERE.
YEAH,
DO YOU MIND CALLING CHILDREN
AND SEE WHAT THE...
THEN THE OTHER ONE
IS THAT WE'RE CONCERNED
BECAUSE GOING TO CHILDREN,
BUT PENETRATING TRAUMA IN KIDS
IS QUITE RARE.
SO NOBODY KNOWS
WHO'S GOING WHERE.
-THEY'VE GOT THE STORY
THAT IT'S AN ABDOMINAL
PENETRATING WOUND.
-OKAY, SO THEN EVERYTHING
IS COMPLETELY MIXED UP.
-THEY'RE STANDING BY.
OKAY, THEY'RE OKAY.
THEY'VE GOT EVERYBODY
STANDING BY.
-THE SURGEON? OKAY.
-THEIR SURGEONS ARE THERE,
EVERYTHING.
-OKAY.
SO THEN WE WON'T WORRY
ABOUT YOU GUYS.
-OKAY, PERFECT.
THAT'S WONDERFUL.
WE JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY
THAT EVERYTHING WAS OKAY.
-OKAY. THANK YOU.
BYE.
-OKAY. BYE-BYE.
OKAY, SO TRAU...
-VGH EMERGENCY.
HOW CAN I HELP YOU?
-THE 21-YEAR-OLD SHOULD BE HERE
IN 10 MINUTES...
WELL, LESS THAN 10.
[PHONE RINGS]
EMERGENCY. KERRY SPEAKING.
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-...LOST ABOUT TWO PINTS.
-MICHAEL.
IT IS.
WE DON'T EXACTLY KNOW
WHAT THE SITUATION WAS.
APPARENTLY, IT WAS
AN ALTERCATION WITH A ROOMMATE.
-WE DON'T KNOW
IF THERE WAS A KNIFE INVOLVED,
OR IF THERE WAS A BOTTLE
INVOLVED,
OR WHAT HAPPENED,
BUT HE HAD
QUITE A SIGNIFICANT BLEED
ON HIS HAND.
-MAKE A FIST.
-HE WANTED HIS HAND SUTURED
WITHOUT ANY LIDOCAINE.
-WELL, THIS STITCH IS A NEEDLE.
NO, I DON'T THINK
THAT'S A GOOD IDEA.
-HE HAD NO FREEZING,
SO IT WAS, BASICALLY,
WE WERE SEWING HIS HAND UP
WITHOUT ANY FREEZING AT ALL.
-IT'S GOING TO BE SORE, OKAY?
DO YOU WANT TO PUT YOUR HAND
UP FOR A SECOND,
AND WE'LL JUST PUT SOME...
-YOU ARE A WILD GUY.
AT TIMES,
WE'LL CHAT WITH PEOPLE
TO HELP TO SETTLE THEM DOWN.
OH, YEAH, YEAH.
YEAH, YEAH.
I KNOW WHAT YOU MEAN.
-JUST TRY
AND KEEP YOUR HANDS DOWN, THERE,
MICHAEL.
-YEAH. WE HAD, UH,
50 CASES OF THOSE.
-SHE'D BEEN AT THAT FOR A WHILE.
HE SEEMED TO KIND OF LIKE ME
RIGHT FROM THE GET-GO,
SO I TOOK THAT UPON MYSELF
THAT I MAY BE BENEFICIAL
TO HELP HIM KEEP HIS HAND STILL
AND TAKE HIS MIND OFF THINGS
WHILE THE DOCTOR
DID HIS STITCHES.
-I'M A NATURALIST,
I EAT NATURAL FOOD,
I NEVER EAT OUT.
-YOU NEVER EAT OUT?
GOOD. MAKE ALL YOUR OWN FOOD.
VERY SMART.
-YOU'RE A ROBUST FELLOW.
NOT MANY PEOPLE WOULD HAVE
LIKED THAT VERY MUCH.
-OH.
WAS ONE OF THE VEINS CUT?
-TWO OR THREE.
-OH. DID YOU...
-PUT THEM ALL
BACK TOGETHER?
-YEAH.
-YES. YES.
-NEXT, THEY'LL GIVE YOU
THAT TETANUS SHOT.
IS THAT OKAY?
[LAUGHING] FORGET IT!
-IT'S A REALLY
IMPORTANT QUALITY
IN AN EMERGENCY NURSE
TO HAVE A GOOD SENSE OF HUMOUR,
BECAUSE YOU CAN DEFUSE
A THOUSAND DIFFERENT SITUATIONS
WITH A SENSE OF HUMOUR.
-THANK YOU.
ON MY WAY OUT RIGHT NOW,
HE GAVE ME A LITTLE KISS
ON THE HAND
AND TOLD ME THAT I WAS THE,
YOU KNOW, MOST BEAUTIFUL PERSON
HE'D EVER SEEN
IN HIS ENTIRE LIFE,
SO, YOU KNOW, YOU'VE GOT TO TAKE
THESE LITTLE COMPLIMENTS
WHEREVER YOU CAN GET THEM.
-IF THERE'S PANDEMONIUM
AND EVERYONE'S TALKING
OVER EACH OTHER
AND EMOTIONS ARE RAW,
PEOPLE MAKE MISTAKES,
AND THINGS JUST DON'T GO THE WAY
THAT THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO,
SO THAT ELEMENT OF CALM
AND ORGANIZATION AND BACKUPS
IS KEY IN THOSE SITUATIONS.
-CODEINE?
-A 20-YEAR-OLD FEMALE
WITH ONE STAB WOUND.
THERE IS NO EVIDENCE
OF EXTERNAL EXSANGUINATION.
THERE IS BLOOD ON THE GROUND,
BUT SHE DID NOT, FROM WHAT
THE PARAMEDIC DESCRIBED,
SHE DID NOT BLEED OUT.
-THEY SAID 10 MINUTES.
AND THAT WAS, LIKE,
10 MINUTES AGO.
-AND THEN,
SO CALL OUT EVERYTHING--
AIRWAY, BREATHING, CIRCULATION,
LOUD AND CLEAR.
IT'S GOING TO GET
PRETTY HECTIC.
-YEAH.
-IT'S HERE.
-HERE?
-YEAH.
[HELICOPTER BLADES WHIR]
-JOHN, THEY'RE HERE.
-THEY'RE DOING COMPRESSIONS.
[PAGING OVER PA]
[BUSTLE OF TRAUMA DISCUSSION]
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-SHE'S GOING TO START CPR FIRST
ON THIS SIDE.
WORK IVs AND STUFF
ON THAT SIDE.
-...THREE.
-SHE WAS DOWN BETWEEN
10 TO 15 MINUTES WITH NO CPR
PRIOR TO POLICE OFFICERS
ARRIVING ON SCENE
AND STARTING CPR,
AND WE'VE BEEN DOING CONTINUOUS
CPR EN ROUTE HERE.
WE GAVE HER EPI.
SHE'S HAD A TOTAL
OF SIX EPIS TODAY.
SHE ALSO HAD SOME BLOOD,
AND SHE VOMITED IN HER AIRWAY,
WHICH WAS SUCTIONED OUT.
-OKAY, THANK YOU.
[LOUD BEEPING]
[BUSTLE OF TRAUMA TEAM CHATTER]
-CAN SOMEBODY ATTACH THE BAGGER
TO THE OXYGEN
INSTEAD OF IT ON THE TANK?
-HOW'S CPR?
ARE YOU GETTING TIRED?
-I'LL CPR.
-YEP.
[OXYGEN HISSING]
-WHEN I LOOK
WITH THE ULTRASOUND,
THAT ALLOWS US TO TAKE A LOOK
AT THE HEART,
WHAT'S THE CAUSE
OF HAVING NO PULSE?
IS IT THAT
THE HEART HAS STOPPED
BECAUSE OF A HEART ATTACK?
IS IT THAT THE PATIENT
HAS NO MORE BLOOD TO CIRCULATE?
-THERE IS NO ELECTRICAL
ACTIVITY.
I DON'T SEE IT.
-THERE'S NO MECHANICAL ACTIVITY
WHATSOEVER, NO.
NO.
-JUST COVER HER.
-DID YOU FIND THE STAB WOUND?
-YOU KNOW,
THE REALITY IS, IT'S HARD.
IT'S A YOUNG PERSON.
IT'S A HUMAN LIFE,
AND, YOU KNOW,
IT'S A DIFFICULT PART
OF THE JOB.
-IT'S EASIER
WHEN IT'S SOMEONE OLDER
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW,
THAT'S THEIR TIME.
IT'S NORMAL FOR OLDER PEOPLE
TO PASS AWAY,
BUT THERE'S NOTHING NATURAL
ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED IN THERE
AT ALL.
-IT'S THE PART THAT, I THINK,
EVERY DOCTOR HATES.
THAT SUCKS.
-THAT TOTALLY SUCKS.
-[MAN MOANING] OH, OH!
-WHAT DO YOU NEED?
-IS HE WAKING UP?
-HE WANTS TREATMENT
IN 14 AND IN SEVEN.
-OPEN YOUR EYES.
SQUEEZE MY FINGERS HERE.
SQUEEZE.
-YOU'VE GOT TO PUT IT BEHIND YOU
AND THEN MOVE FORWARD,
AND THEN FOCUS ON THE PATIENT
THAT YOU CAN DO SOMETHING ABOUT.
[BEEPING]
[PATIENT GROANS IN PAIN]
-THIS JOB CHANGES YOU
AND MAKES YOU LOOK AT LIFE
IN A DIFFERENT WAY.
-YOU ALWAYS WIND UP
VERY GRATEFUL FOR WHAT YOU HAVE.
MY WIFE AND I NEVER MISS OUT
ON AN OPPORTUNITY
TO SAY "I LOVE YOU,"
NEVER LEAVE ON A BAD FOOT,
BECAUSE ANYTHING CAN HAPPEN
AT ANY TIME.
-I FEEL SO LUCKY
TO BE AN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
PHYSICIAN,
AND TO SEE PEOPLE
AT THE HARDEST TIMES
OF THEIR LIFE,
AND TO BE ABLE TO, HOPEFULLY,
MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
THERE'S NOTHING LIKE IT.
-EMERGENCY. HOLD THE LINE.
HI. HOW CAN I HELP YOU?
[PHONE RINGS]
HOLD THE LINE.
EMERGENCY. HOW CAN I HELP YOU?
[♪♪♪♪♪]
-NEXT WEEK ON EMERGENCY ROOM:
LIFE AND DEATH AT VGH.
-TO KEEP ORGANIZATION,
COMMUNICATION
IS ABSOLUTELY CRUCIAL.
-SHE HIT ANOTHER CAR,
AND SHE HAS ONE
11-MONTH-OLD BABY INSIDE.
-THEY SAID
THE TENDONS WERE CUT.
-YEAH, I THINK THEY ARE.
-SHE KNEW, ON SOME LEVEL,
AND SAID "IS HE GONE?"
-SSH.
-GUYS.
-QUIET.
-JUST LOWER IT DOWN A BIT.
-STRUCK THE BACK OF HIS HEAD.
-SKI PATROL FOUND HIM
UNCONSCIOUS, UNRESPONSIVE.
SEIZED THREE TIMES
IN FRONT OF THEM.
-AAH!
-OPEN YOUR EYES!
-WHAT THE FUCK WAS THAT?
-WE'RE GOING
TO SWITCH OFF ON CPR
EVERY THREE MINUTES, PLEASE.
-YEAH, HE'S GOT SOME ACTIVITY.
IT MIGHT BE VF.
[LONG BEEP]
SHOCK.
-OH, LORD.
THE WORLD'S IMPLODING.